---
title: 'SmilesDB: A SMILES-first molecular database API'
tags:
  - database
  - SMILES
  - molecules
  - python
  - web
authors:
  - name: William C. Choi-Kim
    orcid: 0009-0000-3902-4745
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - index: 1
    name: Cy-Fair Senior High School
date: 27 June 2025
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

`SmilesDB` is a database and API that stores 5,479 both small and complex molecules in the SMILES string format. It includes a web-based database UI and a free and open API. Each molecule includes its SMILES identifier as well as atom counts, bond counts, and other molecular information generated by RDKit.

# Statement of need

SMILES strings are a compact, powerful format for storing molecule data. They are widely supported and backed by an extensive realm of theory and software. However, the SMILES specification is not generally adopted in large molecular databases and is usually provided as a property of stored molecules.

`SmilesDB` was first designed as a result of a previous project's need for large numbers of proteins to test new algorithms in WolframLanguage. Importing SMILES strings into WolframLanguage is well-supported, so the project called for a database of SMILES strings. Finding a lack of such a database, `SmilesDB` was built with data from the `BindingDB` [@chembl] and the `ChemBL` [@bindingdb] databases. Storing molecules in SMILES strings enables a total database size of under 2 megabytes. The SmilesDB database and server code has been archived to Zenodo [@Choi-Kim_2025].

# State of the Field
The SMILES specification was proprietary in its early days and is now insufficient in many cases to store enough chemical information to provide relevant molecule specifications for many modern use-cases. Additionally, as a result of its proprietary beginnings, there are multiple branching open SMILES specifications, leading to inconsistencies between chemical tools. 

However, SMILES remains one of the most efficient human-readable formats in which to store basic molecular data, and with the modern specification, it is possible to store more advanced data - including isomerism and ring closures.

# Functionality

## Web API

The core functionality of SmilesDB is as a web-app and online API with easily accessible endpoints.

| Endpoint              | Description                                      |
|-----------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| `/api/smiles/full`    | Gets the full list of SMILES strings as a JSON list. |
| `/api/smiles/random/n_` | Returns `n_` random SMILES strings.               |
| `/api/smiles/short/n_`  | Returns `n_` shortest SMILES strings.             |
| `/api/smiles/long/n_`   | Returns `n_` longest SMILES strings.              |{width="100%"}

Table 1: available API endpoints for SmilesDB

The return from the API endpoints will be a JSON array consisting of some number of JSON objects. The array will look something like:
```JSON
[
  {"LogP":1.99502,"SMILES":"Cc1ccccc1","TPSA":0.0,"formula":"C7H8","hbond_acceptors":0,"hbond_donors":0,"num_atoms":7,"num_bonds":7,"rotatable_bonds":0,"weight":92.14099999999999},
  {"LogP":1.99502,"SMILES":"Cc1ccccc1","TPSA":0.0,"formula":"C7H8","hbond_acceptors":0,"hbond_donors":0,"num_atoms":7,"num_bonds":7,"rotatable_bonds":0,"weight":92.14099999999999}
]
```{width="100%"}
Some fields may not always exist in every JSON object, though an empty object will never be returned in the array.

| Field              | Description                             |
|--------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| `SMILES`           | SMILES string                           |
| `formula`          | Molecular formula                       |
| `weight`           | Molecular weight                        |
| `num_atoms`        | Number of atoms                         |
| `num_bonds`        | Number of bonds                         |
| `LogP`             | Wildman-Crippen LogP value              |
| `TPSA`             | Topological Polar Surface Area (TPSA)   |
| `rotatable_bonds`  | Number of rotatable bonds               |
| `hbond_donors`     | Number of H-bond donors                 |
| `hbond_acceptors`  | Number of H-bond acceptors              |{width="100%"}

Table 2: JSON object field types in return array from SmilesDB

## Integrating the API
Because the `SmilesDB` API is open and can be requested from any programming language with a http request framework, integrating `SmilesDB` into existing projects is simple. 

For example, in `WolframLanguage`, integration is as simple as:
```mathematica
getRandom[n_Integer] := Molecule /@ ImportString[
    URLRead[
        "https://smilesdb.org/api/smiles/random/"<>ToString[n]
      ,"Body"]
  ,"JSON"] 
```{width="100%"}
[@wolframInterface]

# Available Data
Each molecule in `SmilesDB` includes data from RDKit [@rdkit] as well as a SMILES string identifier. The full database can be queried using the online API at [smilesdb.org/api](https://smilesdb.org/api) with a variety of dynamic endpoints for any number of molecules.

# Acknowledgements

Thank you to Jason Sonnenberg for his support during the early stages of this project.

# References